In “Exactitude,” Calvino reads Leopardi, whose “search for the indefinite becomes the observation of all that is multiple, teeming, composed of countless particles” (60). Calvino uncovers this as a (to me, the) style of poetics rooted in a failure of comprehending infinity, instead grasping at it through an approximation found in and between specificities. This is where exactitude, for him, reveals some of its merit, later writing, “since the human mind cannot conceive the infinite, and in fact falls back aghast at the very idea of it, it has to make do with what is indefinite, with sensations as they mingle together and create an impression of infinite space, illusory but pleasurable all the same” (63). Exactitude is not poetic because it describes things accurately. In fact, there is a tension between precision and accuracy [ “One path goes into the mental space of bodiless rationality, where one may trace lines that converge, projections, abstract forms, vectors of force. The other path goes through a space crammed with objects and attempts to create a verbal equivalent of that space by filling the page with words, involving a most careful, painstaking effort to adapt what is written to what is not written, to the sum of what is sayable and not sayable. These are two different drives toward exactitude that will never attain complete fulfillment, one because "natural" languages always say something more than formalized languages can-natural languages always involve a certain amount of noise that impinges upon the essentiality of the information-and the other because, in representing the density and continuity of the world around us, language is revealed as defective and fragmentary, always saying something less with respect to the sum of what can be experienced” (74-75).]. Instead, exactitude, through its inevitable failure in all encompassing a complete description, highlights a lonely, beautiful nature of intersubjective, longing human experience.

In attempting to fabricate Calvino’s memo on consistency, I struggled to wrestle this bumpy, precise exactitude out of an LLM. I think it may not be possible. A computer program umwelt is not quite so poetic. Any concept of indefiniteness does not exist within the architecture of the machine. Programs compute or crash. The machine, as a result, occupies a turing-complete cosmology where everything is procedural and formalist, with nearly any state re-creatable through clever manipulation of cybernetic flows. So, understandably, AI outputs feel smooth and computable. 

In the end, the memo was a decent forgery, making a cogent argument that felt stylistically related to Calvino’s other work. What it lacked, however, was a sense of volatile poetic grasping bubbling under the surface of the others. It was a statistical flattening of its inputs into a neat conclusion.

Interested in the specificities that undergird the output, rather than the statistical flatness [that said, I have complex feelings on AI, I use it for many administrative tasks], as an attempt to reconstruct some of language’s associative volatility, I took a look at machine learning training text, thinking of it as the digital loam of human expression. The elements that make up Leopardi’s indefiniteness. Before being compressed and statistically analyzed, the dataset is home to exactitudes that make up the texture of communication and thought, rather than its analysis. Whereas the writer grapples with language and knows he cannot translate experience into structure perfectly, the computer does not encounter this slippage as a purely structured being.

I reverse engineered the LLM’s text into its constituent parts, finding the most similar [The program finds 500 candidate sentences with keyword search, then picks the best one using a weighted score led by embedding cosine similarity, plus topic blend, lexical overlap, style similarity, retrieval score, and prior-sentence cohesion, with penalties for low overlap/semantic match.] sentence within a subset of 50,000,000 training sentences. It’s well-structured nonsense, but there is—in their adjacency—a sense of indefiniteness of language, the poetic breakdown (or excess) of meaning, especially in networked communication.

Clicking on a sentence in the left column will bring you to the page it was scraped from, if it is still live. Each is rendered in its original font.

There is a property of certain substances—honey, pitch, the vitreous humor of the eye—that resists the name we give it. The name suggests fixity. What I wish to describe for you is not fixed but flowing. It is not rigid but adhering. Not the stubbornness of the wall but the tenacity of the vine that has learned the wall so intimately it no longer requires it, having internalized the wall's geometry into its own cellulose and become a wall of another kind.